LET. XLIX.
TO THE LADY R——.

Paris, Oct. 10. O. S. 1718.
    

      I CANNOT give my dear Lady R—— a better proof of the pleasure I have in writing to her, than chusing to do it in
      this seat of various amusements, where I am accableed with visits, and those so full of vivacity and
      compliments, that 'tis full employment enough to hearken, whether one answers or not. The French ambassadress
      at Constantinople has a very considerable and numerous family here, who all come to see me, and are never weary
      of making inquiries. The air of Paris has already had a good effect on me; for I was never in better health,
      though I have been extremely ill all the road from Lyons to this place. You may judge how agreeable the journey
      has been to me; which did not want that addition to make me dislike it. I think nothing so terrible as objects of
      misery, except one had the God-like attribute of being capable to redress them; and all the country villages of
      France shew nothing else. While the post horses are changed, the whole town comes out to beg, with such miserable
      starved faces, and thin tattered cloths, they need no other eloquence, to persuade one of the wretchedness of
      their condition. This is all the French magnificence, till you come to Fountainbleau, when you are shewed one
      thousand five hundred rooms in the king's hunting palace. The apartments of the royal family are very large,
      and richly gilt; but I saw nothing in the architecture or painting worth remembering. The long gallery, built by
      Henry IV. has prospects of all the king's houses. Its walls are designed after the taste of those times, but
      appear now very mean. The park is, indeed, finely wooded and watered, the trees well grown and planted, and in
      the fish-ponds are kept tame carp, said to be, some of them, eighty years of age. The late king passed some
      months every year at this seat; and all the rocks round it, by the pious sentences inscribed on them, shew the
      devotion in fashion at his court, which I believe died with him; at least, I see no exterior marks of it at
      Paris, where all peoples thoughts seem to be on present diversion.
    

      THE fair of St Lawrence is now in season. You may be sure I have been carried thither, and think it much better
      disposed than ours of Bartholomew. The shops being all set in rows so regularly and well lighted, they made up a
      very agreeable spectacle. But I was not at all satisfied with the grossierte of their harlequin, no more
      than with their music at the opera, which was abominably grating, after being used to that of Italy. Their house
      is a booth, compared to that of the Hay-market, and the play-house not so neat as that of
      Lincoln's-Inn-fields; but then it must be owned, to their praise, their tragedians are much beyond any of
      ours. I should hardly allow Mrs O——d a better place than to be confidante to La ——. I have seen the tragedy of
      Bajazet so well represented, that I think our best actors can be only said to speak, but these to feel; and
      'tis certainly infinitely more moving to see a man appear unhappy, than to hear him say that he is so, with a
      jolly face, and a stupid smirk in his countenance.—A propos of countenances, I must tell you something of
      the French ladies; I have seen all the beauties, and such—(I can't help making use of the coarse word)
      nauseous creatures! so fantastically absurd in their dress! so monstrously unnatural in their paints! their hair
      cut short, and curled round their faces, and so loaded with powder, that it makes it look like white wool! and on
      their cheeks to their chins, unmercifully laid on a shining red japan, that glistens in a most flaming manner, so
      that they seem to have no resemblance to human faces. I am apt to believe, that they took the first hint of their
      dress from a fair sheep newly ruddled. 'Tis with pleasure I recollect my dear pretty country-women: and if I
      was writing to any body else, I should say, that these grotesque daubers give me still a higher esteem of the
      natural charms of dear Lady R——'s auburne (sic) hair, and the lively colours of her unsullied complexion. I
      am, &c. &c.
    

P. S. I have met the Abbe here, who desires me to make his compliments to you.