LET. LVIII.
TO THE COUNT ——.

      Translated from the French.
    

      I AM charmed, Sir, with your obliging letter; and you may perceive, by the largeness of my paper, that I intend
      to give punctual answers to all your questions, at least if my French will permit me; for, as it is a language I
      do not understand to perfection, so I much fear, that, for want of expressions, I shall be quickly obliged to
      finish. Keep in mind, therefore, that I am writing in a foreign language, and be sure to attribute all the
      impertinencies and triflings (sic) dropping from my pen, to the want of proper words for declaring my thoughts,
      but by no means to dulness, or natural levity.
    

      THESE conditions being thus agreed and settled, I begin with telling you, that you have a true notion of the
      alcoran, concerning which the Greek priests (who are the greatest scoundrels in the universe) have invented, out
      of their own heads, a thousand ridiculous stories, in order to decry the law of Mahomet; to run it down, I say,
      without any examination, or so much as letting the people read it; being afraid, that if once they began to sift
      the defects of the alcoran, they might not stop there, but proceed to make use of their judgment about their own
      legends and fictions. In effect, there is nothing so like as the fables of the Greeks and of the Mahometans; and
      the last have multitudes of saints, at whose tombs miracles are by them said to be daily performed; nor are the
      accounts of the lives of those blessed musselmans much less stuffed with extravagancies, than the spiritual
      romances of the Greek papas.
    

      AS to your next inquiry, I assure you, 'tis certainly false, though commonly believed in our parts of the
      world, that Mahomet excludes women from any share in a future happy state. He was too much a gentleman, and loved
      the fair sex too well, to use them so barbarously. On the contrary, he promises a very fine paradise to the
      Turkish women. He says, indeed, that this paradise will be a separate place from that of their husbands; but I
      fancy the most part of them won't like it the worse for that; and that the regret of this separation will not
      render their paradise the less agreeable. It remains to tell you, that the virtues which Mahomet requires of the
      women, to merit the enjoyment of future happiness, are, not to live in such a manner as to become useless to the
      world, but to employ themselves, as much as possible, in making little musselmans. The virgins, who die virgins,
      and the widows who marry not again, dying in mortal sin, are excluded out of paradise: For women, says he, not
      being capable to manage the affairs of state, nor to support the fatigues of war, God has not ordered them to
      govern or reform the world; but he has entrusted them with an office which is not less honourable; even that of
      multiplying the human race: and such as, out of malice or laziness, do not make it their business to bear or to
      breed children, fulfil not the duty of their vocation, and rebel against the commands of God. Here are maxims for
      you, prodigiously contrary to those of your convents. What will become of your St Catharines, your St Theresas,
      your St Claras, and the whole bead-roll of your holy virgins and widows; who, if they are to be judged by this
      system of virtue, will be found to have been infamous creatures, that passed their whole lives in most abominable
      libertinism.
    

      I KNOW not what your thoughts may be, concerning a doctrine so extraordinary with respect to us; but I can truly
      inform you, Sir, that the Turks are not so ignorant as we fancy them to be in matters of politics, or philosophy,
      or even of gallantry. 'Tis true, that military discipline, such as now practised in Christendom, does not
      mightily suit them. A long peace has plunged them into an universal sloth. Content with their condition, and
      accustomed to boundless luxury, they are become great enemies to all manner of fatigues. But, to make amends, the
      sciences flourish among them. The effendis (that is to say, the learned) do very well deserve this name: They
      have no more faith in the in inspiration of Mahomet, than in the infallibility of the Pope. They make a frank
      profession of Deism among themselves, or to those they can trust; and never speak of their law but as of a
      politic institution, fit now to be observed by wise men, however at first introduced by politicians and
      enthusiasts.
    

      IF I remember right, I think I have told you, in some former letter, that, at Belgrade, we lodged with a great
      and rich effendi, a man of wit and learning, and of a very agreeable humour. We were in his house about a month,
      and he did constantly eat with us, drinking wine without any scruple. As I rallied him a little on this subject,
      he answered me, smiling, that all creatures in the world were made for the pleasure of man; and that God would
      not have let the vine grow, were it a sin to taste of its juice; but that, nevertheless, the law, which forbids
      the use of it to the vulgar, was very wise, because such sort of folks have not sense enough to take it with
      moderation. This effendi appeared no stranger to the parties that prevail among us: Nay, he seemed to have some
      knowledge of our religious disputes, and even of our writers; and I was surprised to hear him ask, among other
      things, how Mr Toland did.
    

      MY paper, large as it is, draws towards an end. That I may not go beyond its limits, I must leap from religions
      to tulips, concerning which you ask me news. Their mixture produces surprising effects. But, what is to be
      observed most surprising, are the experiments of which you speak concerning animals, and which are tried here
      every day. The suburbs of Pera, Jophana, and Galata, are collections of strangers from all countries of the
      universe. They have so often intermarried, that this forms several races of people, the oddest imaginable. There
      is not one single family of natives that can value itself on being unmixed. You frequently see a person, whose
      father was born a Grecian, the mother an Italian, the grandfather a Frenchman, the grandmother an Armenian, and
      their ancestors English, Muscovites, Asiatics, &c.
    

      THIS mixture produces creatures more extraordinary than you can imagine; nor could I ever doubt, but there were
      several different species of men; since the whites, the woolly and the long-haired blacks, the small-eyed Tartars
      and Chinese, the beardless Brasilians, and (to name no more) the oily-skinned yellow Nova Zemblians, have as
      specific differences, under the same general kind, as grey-hounds, mastiffs, spaniels, bull-dogs, or the race of
      my little Diana, if nobody is offended at the comparison. Now, as the various intermixing of these latter animals
      causes mongrels, so mankind have their mongrels too, divided and subdivided into endless sorts. We have daily
      proofs of it here, as I told you before. In the same animal is not seldom remarked the Greek perfidiousness, the
      Italian diffidence, the Spanish arrogance, the French loquacity; and, all of a sudden, he is seized with a fit of
      English thoughtfulness, bordering a little upon dulness, which many of us have inherited from the stupidity of
      our Saxon progenitors. But the family which charms me most, is that which proceeds from the fantastical
      conjunction of a Dutch male with a Greek female. As these are natures opposite in extremes, 'tis a pleasure
      to observe how the differing atoms are perpetually jarring together in the children, even so as to produce
      effects visible in their external form. They have the large black eyes of the country, with the fat, white, fishy
      flesh of Holland, and a lively air streaked with dulness. At one and the same time, they shew that love of
      expensiveness, so universal among the Greeks, and an inclination to the Dutch frugality. To give an example of
      this; young women ruin themselves, to purchase jewels for adorning their heads, while they have not the heart to
      buy new shoes, or rather slippers for their feet, which are commonly in a tattered condition; a thing so contrary
      to the taste of our English women, that it is for shewing how neatly their feet are dressed, and for shewing this
      only, they are so passionately enamoured with their hoop petticoats. I have abundance of other singularities to
      communicate to you; but I am at the end, both of my French and my paper.