LET. XXXIII.
TO THE COUNTESS OF ——.

Adrianopolis, April 18. O. S.
    

      I WROTE to you, dear sister, and to all my other English correspondents, by the last ship, and only Heaven can
      tell, when I shall have another opportunity of sending to you; but I cannot forbear to write again, though
      perhaps my letter may ly upon my hands this two months. To confess the truth, my head is so full of my
      entertainment yesterday, that 'tis absolutely necessary, for my own repose, to give it some vent. Without
      farther preface, I will then begin my story.
    

      I WAS invited to dine with the grand vizier's lady, and it was with a great deal of pleasure I prepared
      myself for an entertainment, which was never before given to any Christian. I thought I should very little
      satisfy her curiosity, (which I did not doubt was a considerable motive to the invitation) by going in a dress
      she was used to see, and therefore dressed myself in the court habit of Vienna, which is much more magnificent
      than ours. However, I chose to go incognito, to avoid any disputes about ceremony, and went in a Turkish
      coach, only attended by my woman, that held up my train, and the Greek lady, who was my interpretess. I was met
      at the court door by her black eunuch, who helped me out of the coach with great respect, and conducted me
      through several rooms, where her she-slaves, finely dressed, were ranged on each side. In the innermost, I found
      the lady sitting on her sofa, in a sable vest. She advanced to meet me, and presented me half a dozen of her
      friends, with great civility. She seemed a very good woman, near fifty years old. I was surprised to observe so
      little magnificence in her house, the furniture being all very moderate; and, except the habits and number of her
      slaves, nothing about her appeared expensive. She guessed at my thoughts, and told me she was no longer of an age
      to spend either her time or money in superfluities; that her whole expence was in charity, and her whole
      employment praying to God. There was no affectation in this speech; both she and her husband are entirely given
      up to devotion. He never looks upon any other woman; and, what is much more extraordinary, touches no bribes,
      notwithstanding the example of all his predecessors. He is so scrupulous on this point, he would not accept Mr
      W——'s present, till he had been assured over and over, that it was a settled perquisite Of his place, at the
      entrance of every ambassador. She entertained me with all kind of civility, till dinner came in, which was
      served, one dish at a time, to a vast number, all finely dressed after their manner, which I don't think so
      bad as you have perhaps heard it represented. I am a very good judge of their eating, having lived three weeks in
      the house of an effendi at Belgrade, who gave us very magnificent dinners, dressed by his own cooks. The
      first week they pleased me extremely; but, I own, I then began to grow weary of their table, and desired our own
      cook might add a dish or two after our manner. But I attribute this to custom, and am very much inclined to
      believe, that an Indian, who had never tasted of either, would prefer their cookery to ours. Their sauces are
      very high, all the roast very much done. They use a great deal of very rich spice. The soup is served for the
      last dish; and they have, at least, as great a variety of ragouts as we have. I was very sorry I could not eat of
      as many as the good lady would have had me, who was very earnest in serving me of every thing. The treat
      concluded with coffee and perfumes, which is a high mark of respect; two slaves kneeling censed my hair,
      clothes, and handkerchief. After this ceremony, she commanded her slaves to play and dance, which they did with
      their guitars in their hands, and she excused to me their want of skill, saying she took no care to accomplish
      them in that art.
    

      I RETURNED her thanks, and, soon after, took my leave. I was conducted back in the same manner I entered, and
      would have gone straight to my own house; but the Greek lady with me, earnestly solicited me to visit the
      kahya's lady, saying, he was the second officer in the empire, and ought indeed to be looked upon as
      the first, the grand vizier having only the name, while he exercised the authority. I had found so little
      diversion in the vizier's haram, that I had no mind to go into another. But her importunity prevailed
      with me, and I am extremely glad I was so complaisant. All things here were with quite another air than at the
      grand vizier's; and the very house confessed the difference between an old devotee, and a young beauty. It
      was nicely clean and magnificent. I was met at the door by two black eunuchs, who led me through a long gallery,
      between two ranks of beautiful young girls, with their hair finely plaited, almost hanging to their feet, all
      dressed in fine light damasks, brocaded with silver. I was sorry that decency did not permit me to stop to
      consider them nearer. But that thought was lost upon my entrance into a large room, or rather pavilion, built
      round with gilded sashes, which were most of them thrown up, and the trees planted near them gave an agreeable
      shade, which hindered the sun from being troublesome. The jessamines and honey-suckles that twisted round their
      trunks, shed a soft perfume, increased by a white marble fountain playing sweet water in the lower part of the
      room, which fell into three or four basins, with a pleasing sound. The roof was painted with all sorts of
      flowers, falling out of gilded baskets, that seemed tumbling down. On a sofa, raised three steps, and covered
      with fine Persian carpets, sat the kahya's lady, leaning on cushions of white sattin, embroidered; and
      at her feet sat two young girls about twelve years old, lovely as angels, dressed perfectly rich, and almost
      covered with jewels. But they were hardly seen near the fair Fatima, (for that is her name) so much her
      beauty effaced every thing I have seen, nay, all that has been called lovely either in England or Germany. I must
      own, that I never saw any thing so gloriously beautiful, nor can I recollect a face that would have been taken
      notice of near hers. She stood up to receive me, saluting me after their fashion, putting her hand to her heart
      with a sweetness full of majesty, that no court breeding could ever give. She ordered cushions to be given me,
      and took care to place me in the corner, which is the place of honour. I confess, though the Greek lady had
      before given me a great opinion of her beauty, I was so struck with admiration, that I could not, for some time,
      speak to her, being wholly taken up in gazing. That surprising harmony of features! that charming result of the
      whole! that exact proportion of body! that lovely bloom of complexion unsullied by art! the unutterable
      enchantment of her smile!—But her eyes!—large and black, with all the soft languishment of the blue! every turn
      of her face discovering some new grace.
    

      AFTER my first surprise was over, I endeavoured, by nicely examining her face, to find out some imperfection,
      without any fruit of my search, but my being clearly convinced of the error of that vulgar notion, that a face
      exactly proportioned, and perfectly beautiful, would not be agreeable; nature having done for her, with more
      success, what Appelles is said to have essayed, by a collection of the most exact features, to form a perfect
      face. Add to all this, a behaviour so full of grace and sweetness, such easy motions, with an air so majestic,
      yet free from stiffness or affectation, that I am persuaded, could she be suddenly transported upon the most
      polite throne of Europe, no body would think her other than born and bred to be a queen, though educated in a
      country we call barbarous. To say all in a word, our most celebrated English beauties would vanish near her.
    

      SHE was dressed in a caftan of gold brocade, flowered with silver, very well fitted to her shape, and
      shewing to admiration the beauty of her bosom, only shaded by the thin gauze of her shift. Her drawers were pale
      pink, her waistcoat green and silver, her slippers white sattin, finely embroidered: her lovely arms adorned with
      bracelets of diamonds, and her broad girdle set round with diamonds; upon her head a rich Turkish handkerchief of
      pink and silver, her own fine black hair hanging a great length, in various tresses, and on one side of her head
      some bodkins of jewels. I am afraid you will accuse me of extravagance in this description. I think I have read
      somewhere, that women always speak in rapture when they speak of beauty, and I cannot imagine why they should not
      be allowed to do so. I rather think it a virtue to be able to admire without any mixture of desire or envy. The
      gravest writers have spoken with great warmth, of some celebrated pictures and statues. The workmanship of
      Heaven, certainly excels all our weak imitations, and, I think, has a much better claim to our praise. For my
      part, I am not ashamed to own, I took more pleasure in looking on the beauteous Fatima, than the finest piece of
      sculpture could have given me. She told me, the two girls at her feet were her daughters, though she appeared too
      young to be their mother. Her fair maids were ranged below the sofa, to the number of twenty, and put me in mind
      of the pictures of the ancient nymphs. I did not think all nature could have furnished such a scene of beauty.
      She made them a sign to play and dance. Four of them immediately began to play some soft airs on instruments,
      between a lute and a guitar, which they accompanied with their voices, while the others danced by turns. This
      dance was very different from what I had seen before. Nothing could be more artful, or more proper to raise
      certain ideas. The tunes so soft!—the motions so languishing!—accompanied with pauses and dying eyes!
      half-falling back, and then recovering themselves in so artful a manner, that I am very positive, the coldest and
      most rigid pride upon earth, could not have looked upon them without thinking of something not to be spoke
      of.—I suppose you may have read that the Turks have no music, but what is shocking to the ears; but this
      account is from those who never heard any but what is played in the streets, and is just as reasonable, as if a
      foreigner should take his ideas of English music, from the bladder and string, or the
      marrow-bones and cleavers. I can assure you that the music is extremely pathetic; 'tis true, I
      am inclined to prefer the Italian, but perhaps I am partial. I am acquainted with a Greek lady who sings better
      than Mrs Robinson, and is very well skilled in both, who gives the preference to the Turkish. 'Tis certain
      they have very fine natural voices; these were very agreeable. When the dance was over, four fair slaves came
      into the room, with silver censers in their hands, and perfumed the air with amber, aloes-wood, and other scents.
      After this, they served me coffee upon their knees, in the finest japan china, with soucoups of silver,
      gilt. The lovely Fatima entertained me, all this while, in the most polite agreeable manner, calling me often
      uzelle sultanam, or the beautiful sultana; and desiring my friendship with the best grace in the world,
      lamenting that she could not entertain me in my own language.
    

      WHEN I took my leave, two maids brought in a fine silver basket of embroidered handkerchiefs; she begged I would
      wear the richest for her sake, and gave the others to my woman and interpretess.—I retired through the same
      ceremonies as before, and could not help thinking, I had been some time in Mahomet's paradise; so much was I
      charmed with what I had seen. I know not how the relation of it appears to you. I wish it may give you part of my
      pleasure; for I would have my dear sister share in all the diversions of, Yours,&c.