LET. XXXI.
TO MRS S. C.

Adrianople, April 1. O. S.
    

      IN my opinion, dear S. I ought rather to quarrel with you, for not answering my Nimeguen letter of August, till
      December, than to excuse my not writing again till now. I am sure there is on my side a very good excuse for
      silence, having gone such tiresome land-journies (sic), though I don't find the conclusion of them so bad as
      you seem to imagine. I am very easy here, and not in the solitude you fancy me. The great number of Greeks,
      French, English, and Italians that are under our protection, make their court to me from morning till night; and,
      I'll assure you, are, many of them, very fine ladies; for there is no possibility for a Christian to live
      easily under this government, but by the protection of an ambassador—and the richer they are, the greater is
      their danger.
    

      THOSE dreadful stories you have heard of the plague, have very little foundation in truth. I own, I have
      much ado to reconcile myself to the sound of a word, which has always given me such terrible ideas; though I am
      convinced there is little more in it, than in a fever. As a proof of this, let me tell you that we passed through
      two or three towns most violently infected. In the very next house where we lay, (in one of those places) two
      persons died of it. Luckily for me I was so well deceived, that I knew nothing of the matter; and I was made
      believe, that our second cook had only a great cold. However, we left our doctor to take care of him, and
      yesterday they both arrived here in good health; and I am now let into the secret, that he has had the
      plague. There are many that escape it, neither is the air ever infected. I am persuaded, that it would be
      as easy a matter to root it out here, as out of Italy and France; but it does so little mischief, they are not
      very solicitous about it, and are content to suffer this distemper, instead of our variety, which they are
      utterly unacquainted with.
    

A propos of distempers, I am going to tell you a thing that will make you wish yourself here. The
      small-pox, so fatal, and so general amongst us, is here entirely harmless, by the invention of ingrafting,
      which is the term they give it. There is a set of old women, who make it their business to perform the operation,
      every autumn, in the month of September, when the great heat is abated. People send to one another to know if any
      of their family has a mind to have the small-pox: they make parties for this purpose, and when they are met
      (commonly fifteen or sixteen together) the old woman comes with a nutshell full of the matter of the best sort of
      small-pox, and asks what vein you please to have opened. She immediately rips open that you offer to her, with a
      large needle, (which gives you no more pain than a common scratch) and puts into the vein as much matter as can
      ly upon the head of her needle, and after that, binds up the little wound with a hollow bit of shell; and in this
      manner opens four or five veins. The Grecians have commonly the superstition of opening one in the middle of the
      forehead, one in each arm, and one on the breast, to mark the sign of the cross; but this has a very ill effect,
      all these wounds leaving little scars, and is not done by those that are not superstitious, who chuse to have
      them in the legs, or that part of the arm that is concealed. The children or young patients play together all the
      rest of the day, and are in perfect health to the eighth. Then the fever begins to seize them, and they keep
      their beds two days, very seldom three. They have very rarely above twenty or thirty in their faces, which never
      mark; and in eight days time they are as well as before their illness. Where they are wounded, there remain
      running sores during the distemper, which I don't doubt is a great relief to it. Every year thousands undergo
      this operation; and the French ambassador says pleasantly, that they take the small-pox here by way of diversion,
      as they take the waters in other countries. There is no example of any one that has died in it; and you may
      believe I am well satisfied of the safety of this experiment, since I intend to try it on my dear little son. I
      am patriot enough to take pains to bring this useful invention into fashion in England; and I should not fail to
      write to some of our doctors very particularly about it, if I knew any one of them that I thought had virtue
      enough to destroy such a considerable branch of their revenue, for the good of mankind. But that distemper is too
      beneficial to them, not to expose to all their resentment the hardy wight (sic) that should undertake to put an
      end to it. Perhaps, if I live to return, I may, however, have courage to war with them. Upon this occasion,
      admire the heroism in the heart of Your friend, &c. &c.