LET. XLII.
TO THE COUNTESS OF ——.

      I AM now preparing to leave Constantinople, and perhaps you will accuse me of hypocrisy, when I tell you 'tis
      with regret, but as I am used to the air, and have learnt the language, I am easy here; and as much as I love
      travelling, I tremble at the inconveniencies attending so great a journey, with a numerous family, and a little
      infant hanging at the breast. However, I endeavour, upon this occasion, to do, as I have hitherto done in all the
      odd turns of my life; turn them, if I can, to my diversion. In order to this, I ramble every day, wrapped up in
      my serigee and asmack, about Constantinople, and amuse myself with seeing all that is curious in
      it. I know you will expect that this declaration should be followed with some account of what I have seen. But I
      am in no humour to copy what has been writ so often over. To what purpose should I tell you, that Constantinople
      is the ancient Byzantium? that 'tis at present the conquest of a race of people, supposed Scythians? that
      there are five or six thousand mosques in it? that Sancta Sophia was founded by Justinian? &c. I'll
      assure you, 'tis not for want of learning, that I forbear writing all these bright things. I could also, with
      very little trouble, turn over Knolles and Sir Paul Rycaut, to give you a list of Turkish emperors; but I will
      not tell you what you may find in every author that has writ of this country. I am more inclined, out of a true
      female spirit of contradiction, to tell you the falsehood of a great part of what you find in authors; as, for
      instance, in the admirable Mr Hill, who so gravely asserts, that he saw, in Sancta Sophia, a sweating pillar,
      very balsamic for disordered heads. There is not the least tradition of any such matter; and I suppose it was
      revealed to him in vision, during his wonderful stay in the Egyptian catacombs; for I am sure he never heard of
      any such miracle here. 'Tis also very pleasant to observe how tenderly he and all his brethren voyage-writers
      lament the miserable confinement of the Turkish ladies, who are perhaps more free than any ladies in the
      universe, and are the only women in the world that lead a life of uninterrupted pleasure, exempt from cares;
      their whole time being spent in visiting, bathing, or the agreeable amusement of spending money, and inventing
      new fashions. A husband would be thought mad, that exacted any degree of economy from his wife, whose expences
      are no way limited but by her own fancy. 'Tis his business to get money, and hers to spend it: and this noble
      prerogative extends itself to the very meanest of the sex. Here is a fellow that carries embroidered
      handkerchiefs upon his back to sell. And as miserable a figure as you may suppose such a mean dealer, yet,
      I'll assure you, his wife scorns to wear any thing less than cloth of gold; has her ermine furs, and a very
      handsome set of jewels for her head. 'Tis true, they have no places but the bagnios, and these can only be
      seen by their own sex; however, that is a diversion they take great pleasure in.
    

      I WAS, three days ago, at one of the finest in the town, and had the opportunity of seeing a Turkish bride
      received there, and all the ceremony used on that occasion, which made me recollect the epithalamium of Helen, by
      Theocritus; and it seems to me, that the same customs have continued ever since. All the she-friends, relations
      and acquaintance of the two families, newly allied, meet at the bagnio; several others go, out Of curiosity, and
      I believe there were that day two hundred women. Those that were, or had been married, placed themselves round
      the rooms, on the marble sofas; but the virgins very hastily threw off their clothes, and appeared without other
      ornament or covering, than their own long hair braided with pearl or ribbon. Two of them met the bride at the
      door, conducted by her mother and another grave relation. She was a beautiful maid of about seventeen, very
      richly dressed, and shining with jewels, but was presently reduced to the state of nature. Two others filled
      silver gilt pots with perfume, and began the procession, the rest following in pairs, to the number of thirty.
      The leaders sung an epithalamium, answered by the others in chorus, and the two last led the fair bride, her eyes
      fixed on the ground, with a charming affectation of modesty. In this order they marched round the three largest
      rooms of the bagnio. 'Tis not easy to represent to you the beauty of this sight, most of them being well
      proportioned and white skinned; all of them perfectly smooth and polished by the frequent use of bathing. After
      having made their tour, the bride was again led to every matron round the rooms, who saluted her with a
      compliment and a present, some of jewels, others of pieces of stuff, handkerchiefs or little gallantries of that
      nature, which she thanked them for, by kissing their hands. I was very well pleased with having seen this
      ceremony; and you may believe me, the Turkish ladies have, at least, as much wit and civility, nay liberty, as
      among us. 'Tis true, the same customs that give them so many opportunities of gratifying their evil
      inclinations (if they have any), also put it very fully in the power of their husbands to revenge themselves, if
      they are discovered; and I do not doubt, but they suffer sometimes for their indiscretions in a very severe
      manner. About two months ago, there was found at day break, not very far from my house, the bleeding body of a
      young woman, naked, only wrapped in a course sheet, with two wounds of a knife, one in her side, and another in
      her breast. She was not quite cold, and was so surprisingly beautiful, that there were very few men in Pera, that
      did not go to look upon her; but it was not possible for any body to know her, no woman's face being known.
      She was supposed to have been brought, in the dead of the night, from the Constantinople side, and laid there.
      Very little inquiry was made about the murderer, and the corpse was privately buried without noise. Murder is
      never pursued by the king's officers, as with us. 'Tis the business of the next relations to revenge the
      dead person; and if they like better to compound the matter for money (as they generally do) there is no more
      said of it. One would imagine this defect in their government should make such tragedies very frequent, yet they
      are extremely rare; which is enough to prove the people are not naturally cruel. Neither do I think, in many
      other particulars, they deserve the barbarous character we give them. I am well acquainted with a Christian woman
      of quality, who made it her choice to live with a Turkish husband, and is a very agreeable sensible lady. Her
      story is so extraordinary, I cannot forbear relating it; but I promise you, it shall be in as few words as I can
      possibly express it.
    

      SHE is a Spaniard, and was at Naples with her family, When that kingdom was part of the Spanish dominion. Coming
      from thence in a felucca, accompanied by her brother, they were attacked by the Turkish admiral, boarded and
      taken.—And now how shall I modestly tell you the rest of her adventure? The same accident happened to her, that
      happened to the fair Lucretia so many years before her. But she was too good a Christian to kill herself, as that
      heathenish Roman did. The admiral was so much charmed with the beauty and long-suffering of the fair captive,
      that, as his first compliment, he gave immediate liberty to her brother and attendants, who made haste to Spain,
      and, in a few months, sent the sum of four thousand pounds sterling, as a ransom for his sister. The Turk took
      the money, which he presented to her, and told her she was at liberty. But the lady very discreetly weighed the
      different treatment she was likely to find in her native country. Her relations (as the kindest thing they could
      do for her in her present circumstances) would certainly confine her to a nunnery for the rest of her days.—Her
      infidel lover was very handsome, very tender, very fond of her, and lavished at her feet all the Turkish
      magnificence. She answered him very resolutely, that her liberty was not so precious to her as her honour; that
      he could no way restore that, but by marrying her; and she therefore desired him to accept the ransom as her
      portion, and give her the satisfaction of knowing, that no man could boast of her favours, without being her
      husband. The admiral was transported at this kind offer, and sent back the money to her relations, saying, he was
      too happy in her possession. He married her, and never took any other wife, and (as she says herself) she never
      had reason to repent the choice she made. He left her, some years after, one of the richest widows in
      Constantinople. But there is no remaining honourably a single woman, and that consideration has obliged her to
      marry the present captain bassa (i.e. admiral) his successor.—I am afraid that you will think my friend fell in
      love with her ravisher; but I am willing to take her word for it, that she acted wholly on principles of honour,
      though I think she might be reasonably touched at his generosity, which is often found amongst the Turks of rank.
    

      'TIS a degree of generosity to tell the truth, and 'tis very rare that any Turk will assert a solemn
      falsehood. I don't speak of the lowest sort; for as there is a great deal of ignorance, there is very little
      virtue amongst them; and false witnesses are much cheaper than in Christendom; those wretches not being punished
      (even when they are publicly detected) with the rigour they ought to be.
    

      NOW I am speaking of their law, I don't know whether I have ever mentioned to you one custom peculiar to
      their country, I mean adoption, very common amongst the Turks, and yet more amongst the Greeks and
      Armenians. Not having it in their power to give their estates to a friend or distant relation; to avoid its
      falling into the grand signior's treasury, when they are not likely to have any children of their own, they
      chuse some pretty child of either sex, amongst the meanest people, and carry the child and its parents before the
      cadi, and there declare they receive it for their heir. The parents, at the same time, renounce all future claim
      to it; a writing is drawn and witnessed, and a child thus adopted, cannot be disinherited. Yet I have seen some
      common beggars, that have refused to part with their children in this manner, to some of the richest among the
      Greeks; (so powerful is the instinctive affection that is natural to parents!) though the adopting fathers are
      generally very tender to these children of their souls, as they call them. I own this custom pleases me
      much better than our absurd one of following our name. Methinks, 'tis much more reasonable to make happy and
      rich an infant whom I educate after my own manner, brought up (in the Turkish phrase) upon my
      knees, and who has learned to look upon me with a filial respect, than to give an estate to a creature,
      without other merit or relation to me, than that of a few letters. Yet this is an absurdity we see frequently
      practised.—Now I have mentioned the Armenians, perhaps it will be agreeable to tell you something of that nation,
      with which I am sure you are utterly unacquainted. I will not trouble you with the geographical account of the
      situation of their country, which you may see in the maps; or a relation of their ancient greatness, which you
      may read in the Roman history. They are now subject to the Turks; and, being very industrious in trade, and
      increasing and multiplying, are dispersed in great numbers through all the Turkish dominions. They were, as they
      say, converted to the Christian religion by St Gregory, and are perhaps the devoutest (sic), Christians in the
      whole world. The chief precepts of their priests enjoin the strict keeping of their lents, which are, at least
      seven months in every year, and are not to be dispensed with on the most emergent necessity; no occasion whatever
      can excuse them, if they touch any thing more than mere herbs or roots (without oil) and plain dry bread. That is
      their constant diet.—Mr W——y has one of his interpreters of this nation, and the poor fellow was brought so low,
      by the severity of his fasts, that his life was despaired of. Yet neither his master's commands, nor the
      doctor's entreaties (who declared nothing else could save his life) were powerful enough to prevail with him
      to take two or three spoonfuls of broth. Excepting this, which may rather be called a custom than an article of
      faith, I see very little in their religion different from ours. 'Tis true, they seem to incline very much to
      Mr Whiston's doctrine; neither do I think the Greek church very distant from it, since 'tis certain, the
      holy Spirit's proceeding only from the Father, is making a plain subordination in the Son.—But the
      Armenians have no notion of transubstantiation, whatever account Sir Paul Rycaut gives of them, (which account, I
      am apt to believe, was designed to compliment our Court in 1679;) and they have a great horror for those amongst
      them, that change to the Roman religion. What is most extraordinary in their customs, is their matrimony; a
      ceremony, I believe, unparallell'd (sic) all over the world. They are always promised very young; but the
      espoused never see one another, till three days after their marriage. The bride is carried to church, with a cap
      on her head, in the fashion of a large trencher, and over it a red silken veil, which covers her all over to her
      feet. The priest asks the bridegroom, Whether he is contented to marry that woman, be she deaf, be she
      blind? These are the literal words: to which having answered, yes, she is led home to his house,
      accompanied with all the friends and relations on both sides, singing and dancing, and is placed on a cushion in
      the corner of the sofa; but her veil is never lifted up, not even by her husband. There is something so odd and
      monstrous in these ways, that I could not believe them, till I had inquired of several Armenians myself, who all
      assured me of the truth of them, particularly one young fellow, who wept when he spoke of it, being promised by
      his mother to a girl that he must marry in this manner, though he protested to me, he had rather die than submit
      to this slavery, having already figured his bride to himself with all the deformities of nature.—I fancy I see
      you bless yourself at this terrible relation. I cannot conclude my letter with a more surprising story; yet
      'tis as seriously true, as that I am, Dear sister, yours, &c. &c.