LET. XXIX.
TO THE COUNTESS OF ——.

Adrianople, April. 1. O. S. 1717.
    

      I WISH to God, dear sister, that you were as regular in letting me know what passes on your side of the globe, as
      I am careful in endeavouring to amuse you by the account of all I see here, that I think worth your notice. You
      content yourself with telling me over and over, that the town is very dull: it may, possibly, be dull to you,
      when every day does not present you with something new; but for me that am in arrears, at least two months news,
      all that seems very stale with you, would be very fresh and sweet here. Pray let me into more particulars, and I
      will try to awaken your gratitude, by giving you a full and true relation of the novelties of this place, none of
      which would surprise you more than a sight of my person, as I am now in my Turkish habit, though I believe you
      would be of my opinion, that 'tis admirably becoming.—I intend to send you my picture; in the mean time
      accept of it here.
    

      THE first part of my dress is a pair of drawers, very full that reach to my shoes, and conceal the legs more
      modestly than your petticoats. They are of a thin rose-coloured damask, brocaded with silver flowers. My shoes
      are of white kid leather, embroidered with gold. Over this hangs my smock, of a fine white silk gauze, edged with
      embroidery. This smock has wide sleeves hanging half way down the arm, and is closed at the neck with a diamond
      button; but the shape and colour of the bosom is very well to be distinguished through it.—The antery is a
      waistcoat, made close to the shape, of white and gold damask, with very long sleeves falling back, and fringed
      with deep gold fringe, and should have diamond or pearl buttons. My caftan, of the same stuff with my
      drawers, is a robe exactly fitted to my shape, and reaching to my feet, with very long strait falling sleeves.
      Over this is my girdle, of about four fingers broad, which, all that can afford it, have entirely of diamonds or
      other precious stones; those who will not be at that expence, have it of exquisite embroidery on sattin (sic);
      but it must be fastened before with a clasp of diamonds.—The curdee is a loose robe they throw off, or put
      on, according to the weather, being of a rich brocade (mine is green and gold) either lined with ermine or
      sables; the sleeves reach very little below the shoulders. The head dress is composed of a cap, called
      talpock, which is, in winter, of fine velvet embroidered with pearls or diamonds, and in summer, of a
      light shining silver stuff. This is fixed on one side of the head, hanging a little way down with a gold tassel,
      and bound on, either with a circle of diamonds (as I have seen several) or a rich embroidered handkerchief. On
      the other side of the head, the hair is laid flat; and here the ladies are at liberty to shew their fancies; some
      putting flowers, others a plume of heron's feathers, and, in short, what they please; but the most general
      fashion is a large bouquet of jewels, made like natural flowers; that is, the buds, of pearl; the roses,
      of different coloured rubies: the jessamines, of diamonds; the jonquils, of topazes, &c. so well set and
      enamelled, 'tis hard to imagine any thing of that kind so beautiful. The hair hangs at its full length
      behind, divided into tresses braided with pearl or ribbon, which is always in great quantity. I never saw in my
      life so many fine heads of hair. In one lady's, I have counted a hundred and ten of the tresses, all natural;
      but it must be owned, that every kind of beauty is more common here than with us. 'Tis surprising to see a
      young woman that is not very handsome. They have naturally the most beautiful complexion in the world, and
      generally large black eyes. I can assure you with great truth, that the court of England (though I believe it the
      fairest in Christendom) does not contain so many beauties as are under our protection here. They generally shape
      their eye-brows, and both Greeks and Turks have the custom of putting round their eyes a black tincture, that, at
      a distance, or by candle-light, adds very much to the blackness of them. I fancy many of our ladies would be
      overjoyed to know this secret, but 'tis too visible by day. They dye their nails a rose colour; but, I own, I
      cannot enough accustom myself to this fashion, to find any beauty in it.
    

      AS to their morality or good conduct, I can say, like Harlequin, that 'tis just as 'tis with you; and the
      Turkish ladies don't commit one sin the less for not being Christians. Now, that I am a little acquainted
      with their ways, I cannot forbear admiring, either the exemplary discretion, or extreme stupidity of all the
      writers that have given accounts of them. 'Tis very easy to see, they have in reality more liberty than we
      have. No woman, of what rank soever, is permitted to go into the streets without two murlins, one that
      covers her face all but her eyes, and another, that hides the whole dress of her head, and hangs half way down
      her back. Their shapes are also wholely (sic) concealed, by a thing they call a serigee, which no woman of
      any sort appears without; this has strait sleeves, that reach to their fingers-ends, and it laps all round them,
      not unlike a riding-hood. In winter, 'tis of cloth; and in summer, of plain stuff or silk. You may guess
      then, how effectually this disguises them, so that there is no distinguishing the great lady from her slave.
      'Tis impossible for the most jealous husband to know his wife, when he meets her; and no man dare touch or
      follow a woman in the street.
    

      THIS perpetual masquerade gives them entire liberty of following their inclinations, without danger of discovery.
      The most usual method of intrigue, is, to send an appointment to the lover to meet the lady at a Jew's shop,
      which are as notoriously convenient as our Indian-houses; and yet, even those who don't make use of them, do
      not scruple to go to buy pennyworths, and tumble over rich goods, which are chiefly to be found amongst that sort
      of people. The great ladies seldom let their gallants know who they are; and 'tis so difficult to find it
      out, that they can very seldom guess at her name, whom they have corresponded with for above half a year
      together. You may easily imagine the number of faithful wives very small in a country where they have nothing to
      fear from a lover's indiscretion, since we see so many have the courage to expose themselves to that in this
      world, and all the threatened punishment of the next, which is never preached to the Turkish damsels. Neither
      have they much to apprehend from the resentment of their husbands; those ladies that are rich, having all their
      money in their own hands. Upon the whole, I look upon the Turkish women, as the only free people in the empire;
      the very divan pays respect to them; and the grand signior himself, when a bassa is executed, never violates the
      privileges of the haram, (or womens apartment) which remains unsearched and entire to the widow. They are
      queens of their slaves, whom the husband has no permission so much as to look upon, except it be an old woman or
      two that his lady chuses. 'Tis true, their law permits them four wives; but there is no instance of a man of
      quality that makes use of this liberty, or of a woman of rank that would suffer it. When a husband happens to be
      inconstant, (as those things will happen) he keeps his mistress in a house apart, and visits her as privately as
      he can, just as it is with you. Amongst all the great men here, I only know the testerdar, (i.e. a
      treasurer) that keeps a number of she slaves, for his own use, (that is, on his own side of the house; for a
      slave once given to serve a lady, is entirely at her disposal) and he is spoke of as a libertine, or what we
      should call a rake, and his wife won't see him, though she continues to live in his house. Thus you see, dear
      sister, the manners of mankind do not differ so Widely, as our voyage-writers would make us believe. Perhaps, it
      would be more entertaining to add a few surprising customs of my own invention; but nothing seems to me so
      agreeable as truth, and I believe nothing so acceptable to you. I conclude therefore with repeating the great
      truth of my being, Dear sister, &c.