LET. XXXIX.
TO THE COUNTESS OF ——.

Pera of Constantinople, March 10. O. S.
    

      I HAVE not written to you, dear sister, these many months—a great piece of self-denial. But I know not where to
      direct, or what part of the world you are in. I have received no letter from you since that short note of April
      last, in which you tell me, that you are on the point of leaving England, and promise me a direction for the
      place you stay in; but I have, in vain, expected it till now; and now I only learn from the gazette, that you are
      returned, which induces me to venture this letter to your house at London. I had rather ten of my letters should
      be lost, than you imagine I don't write; and I think it is hard fortune, if one in ten don't reach you.
      However, I am resolved to keep the copies, as testimonies of my inclination, to give you, to the utmost of my
      power, all the diverting part of my travels, while you are exempt from all the fatigues and inconveniences.
    

      IN the first place, then, I wish you joy of your niece; for I was brought to bed of a daughter [Footnote: The
      present Countess of Bute] five weeks ago. I don't mention this as one of my diverting adventures; though I
      must own, that it is not half so mortifying here as in England; there being as much difference, as there is
      between a little cold in the head, which sometimes happens here, and the consumption cough, so common in London.
      No body keeps their house a month for lying in; and I am not so fond of any of our customs, as to retain them
      when they are not necessary. I returned my visits at three weeks end; and, about four days ago, crossed the sea,
      which divides this place from Constantinople, to make a new one, where I had the good fortune to pick up many
      curiosities. I went to see the sultana: Hafiten, favourite of the late emperor Mustapha, who, you know, (or
      perhaps you don't know) was deposed by his brother, the reigning sultan, and died a few weeks after, being
      poisoned, as it was generally believed. This lady was, immediately after his death, saluted with an absolute
      order to leave the seraglio, and chuse herself a husband among the great men at the Porte. I suppose you may
      imagine her overjoyed at this proposal.—Quite the contrary.—These women, who are called, and esteem themselves
      queens, look upon this liberty as the greatest disgrace and affront that can happen to them. She threw herself at
      the sultan's feet, and begged him to poniard (sic) her, rather than use his brother's widow with that
      contempt. She represented to him, in agonies of sorrow, that she was privileged from this misfortune, by having
      brought five princes into the Ottoman family; but all the boys being dead, and only one girl surviving, this
      excuse was not received, and she was compelled to make her choice. She chose Bekir Effendi, then secretary of
      state, and above four score years old, to convince the world, that she firmly intended to keep the vow she had
      made, of never suffering a second husband to approach her bed; and since she must honour some subject so far, as
      to be called his wife, she would chuse him as a mark of her gratitude, since it was he that had presented her, at
      the age of ten years, to, her last lord. But she never permitted him to pay her one visit; though it is now
      fifteen years she has been in his house, where she passes her time in uninterrupted mourning, with a constancy
      very little known in Christendom, especially in a widow of one and twenty, for she is now but thirty-six. She has
      no black eunuchs for her guard, her husband being obliged to respect her as a queen, and not to inquire at all
      into what is done in her apartment.
    

      I WAS led into a large room, with a sofa the whole length of it, adorned with white marble pillars like a
      ruelle, covered with pale blue figured velvet, on a silver ground, with cushions of the same, where I was
      desired to repose, till the sultana appeared, who had contrived this manner of reception, to avoid rising up at
      my entrance, though she made me an inclination of her head, when I rose up to her. I was very glad to observe a
      lady that had been distinguished by the favour of an emperor, to whom beauties were, every day, presented from
      all parts of the world. But she did not seem to me, to have ever been half so beautiful as the fair Fatima I saw
      at Adrianople; though she had the remains of a fine face, more decayed by sorrow than time. But her dress was
      something so surprisingly rich, that I cannot forbear describing it to you. She wore a vest called dualma,
      which differs from a caftan by longer sleeves, and folding over at the bottom. It was of purple cloth,
      strait to her shape, and thick set, on each side, down to her feet, and round the sleeves, with pearls of the
      best water, of the same size as their buttons commonly are. You must not suppose, that I mean as large as those
      of my Lord ——, but about the bigness of a pea; and to these buttons large loops of diamonds, in the form of those
      gold loops, so common on birth-day coats. This habit was tied, at the waist, with two large tassels of smaller
      pearls, and round the arms embroidered with large diamonds. Her shift was fastened at the bottom with a great
      diamond, shaped like a lozenge; her girdle as broad as the broadest English ribband, entirely covered with
      diamonds. Round her neck she wore three chains, which reached to her knees; one of large pearl, at the bottom of
      which hung a fine coloured emerald, as big as a turkey-egg; another, consisting of two hundred emeralds, close
      joined together, of the most lively green, perfectly matched, every one as large as a half-crown piece, and as
      thick as three crown pieces, and another of small emeralds, perfectly round. But her ear-rings eclipsed all the
      rest. They were two diamonds, shaped exactly like pears, as large as a big hazle-nut (sic). Round her
      talpoche she had four strings of pearl—the whitest and most perfect in the world, at least enough to make
      four necklaces, every one as large as the duchess of Marlborough's, and of the same shape, fastened with two
      roses, consisting of a large ruby for the middle stone, and round them twenty drops of clean diamonds to each.
      Besides this, her head-dress was covered with bodkins of emeralds and diamonds. She wore large diamond bracelets,
      and had five rings on her fingers (except Mr Pitt's) the largest I ever saw in my life. 'Tis for
      jewellers to compute the value of these things; but, according to the common estimation of jewels, in our part of
      the world, her whole dress must be worth a hundred thousand pounds sterling. This I am sure of, that no European
      queen has half the quantity; and the empress's jewels, though very fine would look very mean near her's.
      She gave me a dinner of fifty dishes of meat, which (after their fashion) were placed on the table but one at a
      time, and was extremely tedious. But the magnificence of her table answered very well to that of her dress. The
      knives were of gold, and the hafts set with diamonds. But the piece of luxury which grieved my eyes, was the
      table-cloth and napkins, which were all tiffany, embroidered with silk and gold, in the finest manner, in natural
      flowers. It was with the utmost regret that I made use of these costly napkins, which were as finely wrought as
      the finest handkerchiefs that ever came out of this country. You may be sure, that they were entirely spoiled
      before dinner was over. The sherbet (which is the liquor they drink at meals) was served in china bowls; but the
      covers and salvers massy gold. After dinner, water was brought in gold basons, and towels of the same kind with
      the napkins, which I very unwillingly wiped my hands upon, and coffee was served in china, with gold
      soucoups [Footnote: Saucers.]
    

      THE sultana seemed in a very good humour, and talked to me with the utmost civility. I did not omit this
      opportunity of learning all that I possibly could of the seraglio, which is so entirely unknown amongst us. She
      assured me, that the story of the sultan's throwing a handkerchief, is altogether fabulous; and the
      manner, upon that occasion, no other than this: He sends the kyslir aga, to signify to the lady the honour
      he intends her. She is immediately complimented upon it, by the others, and led to the bath, where she is
      perfumed and dressed in the most magnificent and becoming manner. The emperor precedes his visit by a royal
      present, and then comes into her apartment: neither is there any such thing as her creeping in at the bed's
      foot. She said, that the first he made choice of was always after the first in rank, and not the mother of the
      eldest son, as other writers would make us believe. Sometimes the sultan diverts himself in the company of all
      his ladies, who stand in a circle round him. And she confessed, they were ready to die with envy and jealousy of
      the happy she that he distinguished by any appearance of preference. But this seemed to me neither better
      nor worse than the circles in most courts, where the glance of the monarch is watched, and every smile is waited
      for with impatience, and envied by those who cannot obtain it.
    

      SHE never mentioned the sultan without tears in her eyes, yet she seemed very fond of the discourse. "My
      past happiness, said she, "appears a dream to me. Yet I cannot forget, that I was beloved by
      "the greatest and most lovely of mankind. I was chosen from all the "rest, to make all his campaigns
      with him; and I would not survive "him, if I was not passionately fond of the princess my daughter.
      "Yet all my tenderness for her was hardly enough to make me preserve "my life. When I left him, I
      passed a whole twelvemonth without "seeing the light. Time has softened my despair; yet I now pass some
      "days every week in tears, devoted to the memory of my sultan." There was no affectation in these
      words. It was easy to see she was in a deep melancholy, though her good humour made her willing to divert me.
    

      SHE asked me to walk in her garden, and one of her slaves immediately brought her a pellice of rich
      brocade lined with sables. I waited on her into the garden, which had nothing in it remarkable but the fountains;
      and from thence she shewed me all her apartments. In her bed-chamber, her toilet was displayed, consisting of two
      looking-glasses, the frames covered With pearls, and her night talpoche set with bodkins of jewels, and
      near it three vests of fine sables, every one of which is, at least, worth a thousand dollars, (two hundred
      pounds English money.) I don't doubt but these rich habits were purposely placed in sight, though they seemed
      negligently thrown on the sofa. When I took my leave of her, I was complimented with perfumes, as at the grand
      vizier's, and presented with a very fine embroidered handkerchief. Her slaves were to the number of thirty,
      besides ten little ones, the eldest not above seven years old. These were the most beautiful girls I ever saw,
      all richly dressed; and I observed that the sultana took a great deal of pleasure in these lovely children, which
      is a vast expence; for there is not a handsome girl of that age to be bought under a hundred pounds sterling.
      They wore little garlands of flowers, and their own hair, braided, which was all their head-dress; but their
      habits were all of gold stuffs. These served her coffee kneeling; brought water when she washed, &c.—'Tis
      a great part of the work of the older slaves to take care of these young girls, to learn them to embroider, and
      to serve them as carefully as if they were children of the family. Now, do you imagine I have entertained you,
      all this while, with a relation that has, at least, received many embellishments from my hand? This, you will
      say, is but too like the Arabian tales.—These embroidered napkins! and a jewel as large as a turkey's
      egg!—You forget, dear sister, those very tales were written by an author of this country, and (excepting the
      enchantments) are a real representation of the manners here. We travellers are in very hard circumstances: If we
      say nothing but what has been said before us, we are dull, and we have observed nothing. If we tell any
      thing new, we are laughed at as fabulous and romantic, not allowing either for the difference of ranks,
      which affords difference of company, or more curiosity, or the change of customs, that happen every twenty years
      in every country. But the truth is, people judge of travellers, exactly with the same candour, good nature, and
      impartiality, they judge of their neighbours upon all occasions. For my part, if I live to return amongst you, I
      am so well acquainted with the morals of all my dear friends and acquaintances, that I am resolved to tell them
      nothing at all, to avoid the imputation (which their charity would certainly incline them to) of my telling too
      much. But I depend upon your knowing me enough, to believe whatever I seriously assert for truth; though I give
      you leave to be surprised at an account so new to you. But what would you say if I told you, that I have been in
      a haram, where the winter apartment was wainscoted (sic) with inlaid work of mother of pearl, ivory of different
      colours, and olive wood, exactly like the little boxes you have seen brought Out of this country; and in whose
      rooms designed for summer, the walls are all crusted with japan china, the roofs gilt, and the floors spread with
      the finest Persian carpets? Yet there is nothing more true; such is the palace of my lovely friend, the fair
      Fatima, whom I was acquainted with at Adrianople. I went to visit her yesterday; and, if possible, she appeared
      to me handsomer than before. She met me at the door of her chamber, and, giving me her hand With the best grace
      in the world; You Christian ladies (said she, with a smile that made her as beautiful as an angel) have the
      reputation of inconstancy, and I did not expect, whatever goodness you expressed for me at Adrianople, that I
      should ever see you again. But I am now convinced that I have really the happiness of pleasing you; and, if you
      knew how I speak of you amongst our ladies, you would be assured, that you do me justice in making me your
      friend. She placed me in the corner of the sofa, and I spent the afternoon in her conversation, with the greatest
      pleasure in the world.—The sultana Hafiten is, what one Would naturally expect to find a Turkish lady, willing to
      oblige, but not knowing how to go about it; and 'tis easy to see, in her manner, that she has lived excluded
      from the world. But Fatima has all the politeness and good breeding of a court, with an air that inspires, at
      once, respect and tenderness; and now, that I understand her language, I find her wit as agreeable as her beauty.
      She is very carious after the manners of other countries, and has not the partiality for her own, so common in
      little minds. A Greek that I carried with me, who had never seen her before, (nor could have been admitted now,
      if she had not been in my train,) shewed that surprise at her beauty and manners, which is unavoidable at the
      first sight, and said to me in Italian,—This is no Turkish lady, she is certainly some Christian.—Fatima
      guessed she spoke of her, and asked what she said. I would not have told her, thinking she would have been no
      better pleased with the compliment, than one of our court beauties to be told she had the air of a Turk; but the
      Greek lady told it to her; and she smiled, saying, It is not the first time I have heard so: my mother was a
      Poloneze, taken at the siege of Caminiec; and my father used to rally me, saying, He believed his Christian wife
      had found some gallant; for that I had not the air of a Turkish girl.—I assured her, that if all the Turkish
      ladies were like her, it was absolute necessary to confine them from public view, for the repose of mankind; and
      proceeded to tell her, what a noise such a face as hers would make in London or Paris. I can't believe
      you, replied she agreeably; if beauty was so much valued in your country, as you say, they would never
      have suffered you to leave it.—Perhaps, dear sister, you laugh at my vanity in repeating this compliment; but
      I only do it, as I think it very well turned, and give it you as an instance of the spirit of her conversation.
      Her house was magnificently furnished, and very well fancied; her winter rooms being furnished with figured
      velvet, on gold grounds, and those for summer, with fine Indian quilting embroidered with gold. The houses of the
      great Turkish ladies are kept clean with as much nicety as those in Holland. This was situated in a high part of
      the town; and from the window of her summer apartment, we had the prospect of the sea, the islands, and the Asian
      mountains.—My letter is insensibly grown so long, I am ashamed of it. This is a very bad symptom. 'Tis well
      if I don't degenerate into a downright story-teller. It may be, our proverb, that knowledge is no
      burden, may be true, as to one's self but knowing too much, is very apt to make us troublesome to other
      people. I am, &c, &c.