LET. V.
TO THE COUNTESS OF B——.

Nuremberg, Aug. 22. O. S. 1716.
    

      AFTER five days travelling post, I could not sit down to write on any other occasion, than to tell my dear lady,
      that I have not forgot her obliging command, of sending her some account of my travels. I have already passed a
      large part of Germany, have seen all that is remarkable in Cologn, Frankfort, Wurtsburg, and this place. 'Tis
      impossible not to observe the difference between the free towns and those under the government of absolute
      princes, as all the little sovereigns of Germany are. In the first, there appears an air of commerce and plenty.
      The streets are well-built, and full of people, neatly and plainly dressed. The shops are loaded with
      merchandise, and the commonalty are clean and cheerful. In the other you see a sort of shabby finery, a number of
      dirty people of quality tawdered (sic) out; narrow nasty streets out of repair, wretchedly thin of inhabitants,
      and above half of the common sort asking alms. I cannot help fancying one under the figure of a clean Dutch
      citizen's wife, and the other like a poor town lady of pleasure, painted and ribboned out in her head-dress,
      with tarnished silver-laced shoes, a ragged under-petticoat, a miserable mixture of vice and poverty.—They have
      sumptuary laws in this town, which distinguish their rank by their dress, prevent the excess which ruins so many
      other cities, and has a more agreeable effect to the eye of a stranger, than our fashions. I need not be ashamed
      to own, that I wish these laws were in force in other parts of the world. When one considers impartially, the
      merit of a rich suit of clothes in most places, the respect and the smiles of favour it procures, not to speak of
      the envy and the sighs it occasions (which is very often the principal charm to the wearer), one is forced to
      confess, that there is need of an uncommon understanding to resift the temptation of pleasing friends and
      mortifying rivals; and that it is natural to young people to fall into a folly, which betrays them to that want
      of money which is the source of a thousand basenesses (sic). What numbers of men have begun the world with
      generous inclinations, that have afterwards been the instruments of bringing misery on a whole people, being led
      by vain expence (sic) into debts that they could clear no other way but by the forfeit of their honour, and which
      they never could have contracted, if the respect the multitude pays to habits, was fixed by law, only to a
      particular colour or cut of plain cloth! These reflections draw after them others that are too melancholy. I will
      make haste to put them out of your head by the farce of relicks, with which I have been entertained in all Romish
      churches.
    

      THE Lutherans are not quite free from these follies. I have seen here, in the principal church, a large piece of
      the cross set in jewels, and the point of the spear, which they told me very gravely, was the same that pierced
      the side of our Saviour. But I was particularly diverted in a little Roman Catholic church which is permitted
      here, where the professors of that religion are not very rich, and consequently cannot adorn their images in so
      rich a manner as their neighbour. For, not to be quite destitute of all finery, they have dressed up an image of
      our Saviour over the altar, in a fair full-bottomed wig very well powdered. I imagine I see your lady ship stare
      at this article, of which you very much doubt the veracity; but, upon my word, I have not yet made use of the
      privilege of a traveller; and my whole account is written with the same plain sincerity of heart, with which I
      assure you that I am, dear Madam, yours, &c. &c.